
html,
    h1 {
    font-family: Helvetica, Geneva, Arial,  SunSans-Regular, sans-serif 
    }
    body {
    font-family:Verdana, Geneva, sans-serif; 
   }
Weekly Exercises : #15
2015-06-16 by 
Difficulty level :
Easy/Medium
Problem :
This week, we'll do a little numerical analysis, something a little "financial".

Write a program that implements the celebrated Black & Scholes formula for European style options (ignoring dividends). To achieve this, you will require a function to approximate the standard normal cumulative distribution function. One approximation is given by equation 26.2.17 of Abramowitz and Stegun and has been in use since around 1955. Another approximation due to Moro in 1995 is given in code in this article. Yet another approach for the adventurous is to reflect an existing C++ implementation into OCaml. 

Give the results of your function for both a "call" and a "put" given parameters spot = 42, strike = 40, r = 0.1 vol = 0.21, t = 0.5 where r is a flat continuously compounded interest rate to maturity, vol a root-mean-square lognormal volatility, t the time to expiry.


(*Joel Bjornson*)

let cdf (x: float) =
  let pi = acos (-1.) in
  let rec aux vl sum = function
    | n when n <= 100 ->
      let vl = (vl *. x *. x) /. (2. *. (float n) +. 1.) in
      aux vl (sum +. vl) (n + 1)
    | _               ->
      sum
  in
  let sum = aux x x 1 in
  0.5 +. (sum /. sqrt (2. *. pi)) *. exp ( -.(x *. x) /. 2.)

type option_type =
  | Call
  | Put

let black_sholes ~option_type ~spot ~strike ~r ~vol ~t =
  let vt = vol *. (sqrt t) in
  let sk = log @@ spot /. strike in
  let v2 = (vol *. vol) /. 2. in
  let d1 = (1. /. vt) *. (sk +. (r +. v2) *. t) in
  let d2 = d1 -. vt in 
  let er = exp (-.r *. t) in
  match option_type with
  | Call  ->
    cdf d1 *. spot -. cdf d2 *. strike *. er
  | Put   ->
    cdf (-.d2) *. strike *. er -. cdf (-.d1) *. spot
  
let test option_type =
  let spot = 42. in
  let strike = 40. in
  let r = 0.1 in
  let vol = 0.21 in
  let t = 0.5 in
  black_sholes ~option_type ~spot ~strike ~r ~vol ~t

(* test Call  => 4.84857703377124949 *)
(* test Put   => 0.897754013799806572 *)

(*Sen Han*)

let norm_cdf ( x : float ) : float =
  let pi = 3.1415926535 in
  let b1 = 0.319381530 in
  let b2 = -0.356563782 in
  let b3 = 1.781477937 in
  let b4 = -1.821255978 in
  let b5 = 1.330274429 in
  let x_abs = abs_float x in
  let p = 0.2316419 in
  let t = 1.0 /. (1.0 +. (p *. x_abs)) in
  let z_x =  (1.0 /. (sqrt (2.0 *. pi )))  *. (exp ( ( -.(x_abs ** 2.0) )  /. 2.0 ) ) in
  let b_chain = ( b1 *. t ) +. ( b2 *. (t**2.0) ) +. ( b3 *. ( t**3.0 ) ) +. ( b4 *. ( t ** 4.0 ) ) +. ( b5 *. ( t ** 5.0 ) ) in
  1.0 -. z_x *. b_chain;;

let black_scholes ~spot ~strike ~r ~vol ~t ~cp =
  let d1 = (log (spot/.strike) +. (r +. 0.5*.(vol*.vol))*.t)/.(vol*.(sqrt t)) in
  let d2 = d1 -. vol*.(sqrt t) in
  cp*.spot*.(norm_cdf (cp*.d1)) -. cp*.strike*.(exp ((~-.r)*.t))*.(norm_cdf (cp*.d2));;

print_endline "";;
let r1 = black_scholes ~spot:42. ~strike:40. ~r:0.1 ~vol:0.2 ~t:0.5 ~cp:1.0 ;;
let r2 = black_scholes ~spot:42. ~strike:40. ~r:0.1 ~vol:0.2 ~t:0.5 ~cp:(-1.0) ;;
print_float r1;;
print_endline "";;
print_float r2;;
print_endline "";;
