
html,
    h1 {
    font-family: Helvetica, Geneva, Arial,  SunSans-Regular, sans-serif 
    }
    body {
    font-family:Verdana, Geneva, sans-serif; 
   }
Weekly Exercises : #023
2016-03-30 by 
Difficulty level :
Easy
Problem :
This one is inspired by one of those classic "99 problems in Prolog". What we are looking for here are two functions that satisfy these signatures.
val rotate_left : int -> ݵ list -> ݵ list
val rotate_right : int -> ݵ list -> ݵ list 
rotate_left n rotates a list n places to the left, rotate_right n rotates a list n places to the right. Examples:
# rotate_left 3 ['a';'b';'c';'d';'e';'f';'g';'h'] ;;
- : char list = ['d'; 'e'; 'f'; 'g'; 'h'; 'a'; 'b'; 'c']

# rotate_left (-2) ['a';'b';'c';'d';'e';'f';'g';'h'] ;;
- : char list = ['g'; 'h'; 'a'; 'b'; 'c'; 'd'; 'e'; 'f']
Of course, rotate_left and rotate_right are inverse functions of each other so we expect, for any int x and list l, rotate_right x @@ rotate_left x l = rotate_left x @@ rotate_right x l = l.
Solutions :
Mathias Gaunard provided this solution.
let rotate_left n l =
  let rec rotate_left_impl n l l2 =
    match l with
        [] -> l2
      | hd::tail ->
          if n == 0 then l @ l2
          else (rotate_left_impl (n - 1) tail (l2 @ [hd]))
      in
      rotate_left_impl (if n < 0 then ((List.length l) + n) else n) l []

let rotate_right n l = rotate_left (-n) l
My own was (maybe more efficient but) way more verbose.
let rec drop (k : int) (l : ݵ list) : ݵ list =
  match k, l with
  | i, _ when i <= 0 -> l
  | _, [] -> []
  | _, (_ :: xs) -> drop (k - 1) xs

let rec take (k : int) (l : ݵ list) : ݵ list =
  match k, l with
  | i, _ when i <= 0 -> []
  | _, [] -> []
  | _, (x :: xs)  -> x :: take (k - 1) xs

let split_at (n : int) (l : ݵ list) : ݵ list * ݵ list = 
  (take n l), (drop n l)

let rec rotate_left (n : int) (l : ݵ list) : ݵ list =
  match n with
  | _ when n = 0 -> l
  | _ when n < 0 ->  rotate_right (-n) l
  | _ -> 
    let m : int = List.length l in
    let k : int = n mod m in
    let (l : ݵ list), (r : ݵ list) = split_at k l in 
    r @ l

and rotate_right (n : int) (l : ݵ list) : ݵ list =
  match n with
  | _ when n = 0 -> l
  | _ when n < 0 ->  rotate_left (-n) l
  | _ -> 
    let m : int = List.length l in
    let k : int = m - n mod m in
    let (l : ݵ list), (r : ݵ list) = split_at k l in 
    r @ l
Harvey Stein provided a few variants in Lisp.
;;; Slow, easy version:
(defun rotate-left-one (lst)
  (append (cdr lst) (list (car lst))))
(defun rotate-right-one (lst)
  (append (last lst) (butlast lst)))
(defun rotate (n lst)
  (cond ((>= n 1)
         (dotimes (i n) (setq lst (rotate-right-one lst))))
        ((<= n -1)
         (dotimes (i (- n)) (setq lst (rotate-left-one lst)))))
  lst)
(defun rotate-right (n lst)
  (rotate n lst))
(defun rotate-left (n lst)
  (rotate (- n) lst))

;;; Mostly faster version (slower for n=1).
(defun rotate-fast2 (n lst)
  (if (= n 0)
      lst
    (let* ((l (length lst))
           (n (mod n l)))
      (cond ((>= n 1)
             (append (last lst n) (butlast lst n)))
            (t lst)))))

;;; Avoid rescanning list by consing up beginning
(defun rotate-fast3 (n lst)
  (if (= n 0)
      lst
    (let* ((l (length lst))
           (n (mod n l)
      (cond ((>= n 1)
             (rot n () lst))
            (t lst)))))))

(defun rot (n s e)
  (cond ((= n 0) (append e (reverse s)))
        (t (rot (- n 1) (cons (car e) s) (cdr e)))))
Joel Bjornson presented this Haskell solution.
rotateLeft n xs  
 | n >= 0     = take (length xs) $ drop n $ concat $ repeat xs
 | otherwise  = rotateLeft (length xs + n) xs

rotateRight n = rotateLeft (-n)
This last one intrigued me so I set out to emulate it in OCaml.
(*The type of streams*)
type ݵ stream =  Nil | Cons of ݵ * ݵ stream Lazy.t

(*Functions to get the head and tail of a stream*)
let hd = function | Nil -> failwith "hd" | Cons (h, _) -> h
let tl = function | Nil -> failwith "tl" | Cons (_, t) -> Lazy.force t

(*Factory function that given a value [x] computes the infinite stream
  [< x; x; x; ....  >]*)
let rec repeat (x : ݵ) : ݵ stream = 
  Cons (x, lazy (repeat x))

(*Factory function to compute a stream from a list*)
let from_list (l : ݵ list) : ݵ stream =
  List.fold_right (fun x s -> Cons (x, lazy s)) l Nil

(* For eager lists, we can write a function that appends two lists
   'join' like this.
   ```
     let rec join l m =
       match l with
       | [] -> m
       | h :: t -> h :: (join t m)
   ```
   This generalizes naturally to streams.
*)
let rec join (l : ݵ stream) (m : ݵ stream) =
  match l with
  | Nil -> m
  | Cons (h, t) -> Cons (h, lazy (join (Lazy.force t) m))

(* For eager lists, we can write 'flatten' in terms of 'join'
   ```
     let rec flatten : 'a list list -> 'a list = function
     | [] -> []
     | (h :: tl) -> join h (flatten tl)
   ```

   Emboldened by our earlier success we might try to generalize it to
   streams like this.
   ```
     let rec flatten (l : ݵ stream stream) : ݵ stream =
     match l with
     | Nil -> lazy Nil
     | Cons (l, r) ->  join l (flatten (Lazy.force r))
   ```

   Sadly, no. This definition results in stack overflow.
   There is an alternative eager phrasing of 'flatten' we might try.
   ```
     let rec flatten = function
       | [] -> []
       | [] :: t -> flatten t
       | (x :: xs) :: t -> x :: (flatten (xs :: t))
   ```
   
   Happy to say, this one generalizes and gets around the eager
   evaluation problem that causes the unbounded recursion.
*)

let rec flatten : ݵ stream stream -> ݵ stream = function
  | Nil -> Nil
  | Cons (Nil, t) -> flatten (Lazy.force t)
  | Cons (Cons (x, xs), t) -> 
    Cons (x, lazy (flatten (Cons (Lazy.force xs, t))))

(*'take' and 'drop' are straight forward generalizations of their
  eager counterparts*)
let rec drop (n : int) (lst : ݵ stream ) : ݵ stream = 
  match (n, lst) with
  | (n, _) when n < 0 -> invalid_arg "negative index in drop"
  | (n, xs) when n = 0 -> xs
  | (_, Nil) -> Nil
  | (n, Cons (_, t)) -> drop (n - 1) (Lazy.force t)

let rec take (n : int) (lst : ݵ stream) : ݵ list = 
  match (n, lst) with
  | (n, _) when n < 0 -> invalid_arg "negative index in take"
  | (n, _) when n = 0 -> []
  | (_, Nil) -> []
  | (n, Cons (h, t)) -> h :: (take (n - 1) (Lazy.force t))

(*Which brings us to the 'rotate' functions given to us by Joel*)

let rec rotate_left (k : int) (l : ݵ list) : ݵ list =
  let n = List.length l in
  if k >= 0 then
    l |> from_list |> repeat |> flatten |> drop n |> take n
  else rotate_left (n + k) l

let rotate_right (n : int) : ݵ list -> ݵ list = rotate_left (-n)

