
html,
    h1 {
    font-family: Helvetica, Geneva, Arial,  SunSans-Regular, sans-serif 
    }
    body {
    font-family:Verdana, Geneva, sans-serif; 
   }
Weekly Exercises : #27
2016-06-09 by 
Difficulty level :
Easy
Problem :
This week we'll model some very simple category theoretic problems in OCaml. This whole exercise should only require about 7 lines of code!
 
Assuming types (objects) ¦Á and ¦Â define an OCaml type suitable for describing the binary product ¦Á x ¦Â

Write the function (morhphism) dup which, given it's argument x computes the product instance (x, x).

ENG Derivatives Library > Week #027 > 20160722_113026.jpg


Given a pair (x, y) we can compute a new pair (y, x). Call this function twist.

ENG Derivatives Library > Week #027 > 20160722_113034.jpg


Given morphisms f : U ¡ú R and g : V ¡ú S we can compute a new function, U * V ¡ú R * S from f and g. Write this function, call it ravel.

ENG Derivatives Library > Week #027 > 20160722_152404.jpg
 
If X * Y denotes a product with projections ¦Ðx and  ¦Ðy, then, for every object Z and pair of morphisms f : Z ¡ú X, g: Z ¡ú Y there exists a unique morphism <f, g> : Z ¡ú X * Y. Write an OCaml definition for it. Call the function product.
 
ENG Derivatives Library > Week #027 > 20160722_113347.jpg


Assuming types (objects) ¦Á and ¦Â define an OCaml type suitable for describing the binary sum ¦Á + ¦Â

If X + Y denotes a sum with injections ix and  iy, then, for every object Z and pair of morphisms f : X ¡ú Z, g: Y ¡ú Z there exists a unique morphism [f, g] : X + Y ¡ú Z. Write an OCaml definition for it. Call the function coproduct.

ENG Derivatives Library > Week #027 > 20160722_113542.jpg

Solutions :
 Here's the "obvious" solutions provided by Peter Nguyen
let dup x = x,x
let twist = function x,y -> y,x
let ravel f g = function u,v -> f u, g v
let product f g = fun z -> f z, g z
type ('a, 'b) either = Left of 'a | Right of 'b
let coproduct f g = function Left x -> f x | Right y -> g y
Minimal. Nice!

I never saw this alternative solution to representation of sums and the coproduct function coming however (courtesy of Joel Bjornson)
type ('a, 'b) sum = { run : 'c. ('a -> 'c) -> ('b -> 'c) -> 'c }
let coproduct (s: ('a, 'b) sum) (f ,g) = s.run f g
Do you get it? Take a minute beore reading on!

Here's a session in the top-level to help you see how this encoding works.

# let int_val i : (int, float) sum = { run = fun f _ -> f i } ;;
val int_val : int -> (int, float) sum = <fun>
# let float_val f : (int,float) sum = { run = fun _ g -> g f } ;;
val float_val : float -> (int, float) sum = <fun>
# coproduct (int_val 42) (string_of_int , string_of_float) ;;
- : string = "42"
# coproduct (float_val 42.) (string_of_int , string_of_float) ;;
- : string = "42."
